node -e "console.log(require('crypto').randomBytes(48).toString('hex'))"

date: 06/10/2026

1.Why bcrypt and not SHA256 or MD5? (salting and a slow, adjustable cost factor)
Why a short-lived access token?
What does select: false do?
Why are the controller and service separate?






2.Interview points from this step

Why validate in a middleware and not in the controller? (Single responsibility, reusable, controllers stay clean.)
Mongoose validation vs Joi validation. (Joi checks the request before the database layer. Mongoose is the last line of defence at the model level. Use both.)
What is mass assignment, and how does stripUnknown prevent it?



3.Interview points from this step
Why return the same error for a wrong email and a wrong password?
What is a timing attack on login? (If a missing user returns faster than a wrong password, because bcrypt is skipped, an attacker can measure the difference. The fix is to run a dummy bcrypt compare when the user isn't found. Good to mention, though not needed for your project right now.)
How would you stop brute-force login attempts? (Rate limiting on /login, account lockout after repeated failures. You will add rate limiting later.)
Difference between authentication (401) and authorization (403).


4.How does JWT authentication work step by step? (Login issues a signed token, the client sends it in the header, the server verifies the signature and expiry.)
What does jwt.verify check, and why not decode?
Stateless JWT vs checking the database on each request: what is the trade-off? (Speed and scale vs the ability to revoke access immediately.)
Where should the client store the token? (Access token in memory, refresh token in an httpOnly cookie. You will build the refresh token next.)
What is the difference between 401 and 403?



dtae: 07/10/2026

1.Interview points from this step
Why store only a hash of the refresh token and reset tokens?
Why use two different JWT secrets?
What does select: false protect against?
How can you stop a stolen access token after a password change? (The passwordChangedAt check.)


2.Why use both an access and a refresh token? Where is each stored, and why?
Why httpOnly cookie? What attacks does httpOnly, secure and sameSite each prevent?
What is refresh token rotation and reuse detection?
Why store a hash of the refresh token in the database? How does that make logout work?
What is the downside of storing one hash per user, and how would you support many devices?